All right, sorry I got sick, but I had a good sleep for two days.
And thanks to Geshe Lotar for teaching.
Geshe Lotar is the nephew of my root Tibetan Lama, Ken Rinpoche Geshe Losantarjun, and
he grew up with Rinpoche from the time he was a child, and so they're kind of similar,
like very tough,
and
he has served as the Gikul of Sarame
monastery, which is part of one of the three largest monasteries in the world, and
and
that's the vice abbot position, and he did a good job. He didn't beat up too many people. That's the debate master.
Sometimes they carry things, and
he worked
he was the master of Gyalong house, which is one of the 12 colleges of Sarame for, I don't know,
probably 30 years,
and maybe a small table, big at that, small table?
Small table, would be good.
And
he brought up countless monks, he taught them how to tie their robes, which is not a small thing to teach somebody,
because it's very complicated, and if you do it wrong, it falls down.
And
he, I don't know, I would say, I don't know, 500 young monks he trained, and
amazing lifetime.
He served my teacher
with his whole heart, his whole life.
I'll show you how
how much
love he had for my teacher. Geshe-la had a green card, American green card,
and he came to stay with us for, I don't know, five, six years, and
then Rinpoche said, they need you back at the monastery,
and
then he asked me, am I going to lose my green card? I said, yeah. He said, okay.
So I think he's the first person in the world to give back his green card,
and he just went home, and he went to train more monks, and
so he's been there since then,
and without him I cannot do the Geshe course,
because there's a lot of rules that we don't know,
countless rules in the monastery that we don't know about from foreigners,
and
even on the day of the Geshe exam, he's tying all these things, I'm chab lu kye duwa,
he's tying things on me like I'm getting married,
and it's getting heavier and heavier, and
then he ties this big bag on my waist, and it covers down to your knees here, I said, what's that?
Chab lu ...
What's a chab lu ... water bag?
I said, why do you have to wear it during your Geshe exam? He says, nobody knows,
but you have to wear it.
Then like stuff like that I would never ever
understand, so without him I wouldn't be here, okay, so you should thank him a thousand times.
He also built many places for the monks,
many ... what do you call them? Dormitories, yeah, difficult job, and his assistant Ngo Yuen Tan is a very good
candidate for Geshe soon,
and we hope he has good luck
and shows Sarah Jay we are better monks than Sarah Jay,
okay, just kidding,
and I heard he's going to teach us some chanting in the next few days, so
that would be nice, okay, and I heard he's going to give a talk in Sedona,
so he agreed, and Geshe-la has agreed to give a talk there, Sedona laya ... that's a tori lapra laya,
lecture yang kya nyi she ... free rey da, free ...
dan lang ...
All right, we're doing class seven, I'd like to thank John Brady for teaching class six last night,
and
it's very nice to have
backup,
and class seven is about the second of the three principal paths, which is what?
Yeah, the wish for enlightenment, capital W, okay?
So that class, I think it has two or three classes, and
they're going to talk about why
do you want to reach bodhichitta, what's so cool about bodhichitta, so
I'd like to first talk about
an Arya's experience of bodhichitta, okay, someone who has seen emptiness directly,
and
so
the way it happens is that, you know, the five paths, path of
accumulation, path of preparation, path of seeing,
path of habituation, path of no more learning, and then
in the first path, basically our learning
different versions of the pen, or, and you are, sorry,
usually they say a good disaster in your life, okay, like if your mother dies at your side or something like that, so then you
get interested in helping all beings, you get interested in getting out of this life,
and then the second path, chor lam, path of preparation, you learn
basically you learn four kinds of emptiness, two that relate to things and two that relate to yourself,
and
if you reach the third one, which is where it starts to relate to yourself, where the pen starts to relate to yourself,
then we talked about it, you reach
gokpa for what, you reach a cessation for
lower realms, you can't be born in the lower realms, so that's a very
doable goal
that an ACI teacher should try to
bring their student to, and it may be the best thing that
anyone ever did for them, so as an ACI teacher you have a cool
responsibility, you have a cool
potential that you could protect someone for the rest of their lifetimes
if you teach it well, if you teach the pen well,
and I think that itself is a good reason to be an ACI teacher,
and I hope you'll all do that, you can help countless people,
and they'll all thank you later, they don't thank you when you're doing it 500 times, but
later they'll thank you.
Then in the last moments of chor lam, chor lam chok chok,
which is called highest thing in the world, but it's the highest thing in the normal world,
you might be
making a tea for your teacher,
and looking at a pot on the stove,
and there are many conditions you need, right? You have to be studying hard,
you have to have a good teacher,
you have to be serving
poor people, old people, sick people,
you have to be meditating an hour every day, okay?
But if all of those are
complete,
then suddenly you realize that when you look at a pot on the stove,
you're not seeing a pot on the stove, you're looking at maybe silver color,
and a circle, and a black stick,
and then a seed is opening in your mind,
and when the seed opens it
it covers the object and it makes it into a pot, and if the seed was a lower seed, like if I had a
an ant seed,
then the same
circle, the same color, it would be a mountain, right? Hot
burning mountain.
So it depends on your seeds, right? And
when you reach DBYOR LAM CHOS CHO, this highest
thing in the world
at the path of preparation,
for the first time
you see a seed opening in your mind, and you have them opening
how many?
65 per second,
but you don't see it, you can't see it, so you have to be meditating a lot,
and
your whole life since you were born,
things are coming from you,
65 pictures a second coming from you,
but it's so fast you couldn't see it, okay?
Then
at that point
you see it for the first time, and it's kind of a fun moment in your life because you're like,
yeah,
Buddhism's right, you know, and
everything they taught me is correct, and you feel kind of
happy and amazed, and
it changes your life forever, you never forget that moment, okay?
Then maybe you go serve the tea to your teacher and go to the temple and meditate, and then
in meditation, I would say within
two hours after the seed opening experience,
you will see emptiness directly, okay? And
that's about 20 minutes, although you don't know how time is passing,
and
you have communion with the
emptiness, and it's higher
reality, that's all around us, but you never saw it before,
and
can you think I did it?
No, because that's not emptiness, okay? So only you can see emptiness at that moment, you cannot
think to yourself, oh I did it, you know?
chu la chu shakpa
water poured into water, okay? And
then
it's a very, very heavy karma, very expensive karma to stay there,
like having a girlfriend is heavy karma,
difficult to keep them,
but this is much more, okay? And it will
burn out very fast, okay? What's that thing you said Stanley? Shavings, wood shavings
from the Abhidharma.
Yeah, it burns hot and it burns
fast, and it finishes, and then you come down,
and then you start to have
a bunch of very cool experiences, very very cool experiences. Later they were grouped together into the four
Arya truths, we're not going to call them
noble truths, because that's a bad translation of Arya, Arya means a
higher, okay? Higher truths.
So you will have these
bunch of cool experiences, it takes about, it's called je tong bye shi,
which means after the direct experience, and it takes about
maybe an hour, maybe a little bit less, and you
have all these amazing experiences, like
I guess the first one is you say, I did it,
I saw emptiness direct me, and that emptiness
which you perceive
is also confirmation of the Buddha, okay? So that's the core
of the Buddha, and so you can say after that that I met the Buddha.
So we're all Buddhist, but
we never met a Buddha, right? The Buddha, historical Buddha, or many people are Christian,
but if you ask them did Jesus exist, we have to say I'm not sure,
I think so, there's a lot of books about it.
And there's a tradition,
but to meet Jesus face to face, or to meet a Buddha face to face,
then that's different, right? And you get this
intense, more happy feeling that you confirmed Buddhism. I told you guys, my boss
in my diamond company,
he,
so I had a deal with him that I would give all my money to the
monastery,
like 90 percent, and
every six months I would go to his office and
give him the number, and he would give me,
he would donate six months salary to Sarah, me,
to feed people, give them houses, and I did that for 19 years.
And
so the first time we did it, he said, you know what, I'll throw in an extra
ten thousand dollars, you know? I'm like, whoa,
that's so cool.
I mean, later I learned I made him hundreds of millions of dollars,
but still it was pretty cool.
And so, you know, I was, thank you very much. And then Rinpoche,
our teacher,
he would know what day I'm going to ask for the money, he'd say, good luck, you know, good luck,
I hope he gives you more, you know?
And then when I came home, he'd be waiting in the kitchen, he'd say, you know,
how much extra? I'd say, oh, ten thousand, ah, great,
you know, and
so
I remember during the geshe degree, you're supposed to make a big gift in the monastery, so I was going to give
a debate ground, a new debate ground, which is, at the time was fifty thousand dollars, maybe,
maybe about two hundred thousand now, something, and
so I told my two bosses, he and his wife, you know, this is a special one,
you know, I have to give a lot of money this time,
you know, and I saw they have this secret language with their hands
when they're doing deals,
they were touching fingers, and they're going, but I saw it, you know, I'm like,
and the wife's going,
the boss is going,
and they had a hand fight for a while,
and then he said, you know what, we'll give you fifty thousand,
we'll donate fifty thousand extra, you know, then I said,
I really appreciate it, you know, I,
but can I ask you a question, and he said, what?
I said, you know, you're from Israel, you are Jewish, everybody, hundred percent
in Israel are Jewish, right Ronit? I mean, ninety-nine,
okay, ninety-four, and
you're all Jewish there, and
you're strong Jewish people, you know, why you
give money for the Buddhist monastery, why you want to give me extra money?
Then he looked at me and he said, you never know who's right,
you know, could be any religion is right,
so the safest thing is to give money to each one,
you know, why am I talking about that?
Yeah, you confirm you're in the right,
you're on the right team,
okay, you're like, ah, hey, yeah, I hit it,
you know, there is a Buddha, and there is emptiness, and
so there's a lot of cool experiences, you see your future Buddhahood,
about five hundred years out,
and it's defined by a number of lifetimes, it's called the sipalendubawa,
which means seven lifetimes, later I found it in the Abhidharma, later I found it, you can check it,
but within seven lifetimes you will be a Buddha, and you see your Buddhahood
directly, which is very cool,
and then you know you will take care of countless beings on this planet,
and many planets, and then
there's a cool experience,
you still have your eyes closed, but you're not seeing emptiness anymore,
this is the four ariya truth time,
and
you see like the face of your mother
comes up in your mind, like, what do you call?
like a
film, on an old film, on a reel, comes up,
and you see your mom, and you say, I love you mom, and
I will take care of you,
then you see your dad comes up next, and you say, dad, I love you, I'll take care of you, and your dad's like, okay,
and then your brothers, and then all your friends,
and then it starts to speed up, like a
what's that gambling machine?
slot machine, like that, it's spinning like that, and you start to see more and more people's faces, and
then you start to see people you don't know,
and you say, I love you, I will take care of you, I love you,
I will take care of you, and then it speeds up even more, and you start to see, okay,
I know you don't believe it, but anyway, you heard it,
birds,
animals, fish, one by one, each one in this world,
you know, one by one coming, you know, and it should take a long time, right?
I think there's a hundred billion animals on this earth,
but because of emptiness,
time gets faster,
so you can sit with someone for a few
seconds, and say, I love you, and I'll take care of you,
and you do all the living creatures on this planet, even amoebas,
I don't know if it's stomach amoebas,
I think we should leave them out,
but you see all those creatures, and then the weird thing, you start seeing people on other planets,
and
one by one, and you do the same thing, and then it goes to another planet, another planet,
and you finish
uncountable planets, okay?
Each person, and each fish, and each animal,
and then you come down, and it's only ten minutes later or something, you know,
and you're like, wow,
and I always tell people, I think after that happens to you,
how can you have a bad day?
You know, like you're throwing up all day, but
you can't have a totally bad day, you know, because
it's so cool
to know what your future is, and to know what you have to do, okay?
And
that is the experience of bodhichitta
by an Arya, okay? By someone who just saw emptiness, okay?
And
it's called, thek chen sem kye, say thek chen sem kye, okay? Highest Mahayana experience of bodhichitta.
And after that, your whole life changes,
and there's, in the
reading I gave you, there's
nine
different cool things that happen,
and I thought I would give you twenty-two more.
Those come from Maitreya,
from the Abhisamalankara, okay?
From the first chapter, so, you know,
I don't know how long I can teach tonight, let's see, but I'm going to try to do those
nine, which are official on your homework,
and twenty-two, which are unofficial on your homework, okay? And if we don't finish the twenty-two tonight, we'll do it tomorrow, okay?
All right, so now I'm going to go through the homework, which is not very long,
say cham chu gyi sem,
yeah, cham chu means
Buddha, Buddhahood, cham chu.
Anybody want to give me the parts for fifty dollars?
I'd make bets with them, money. Seiji, chung,
I make, kaysara,
dama shak gyurye, le yin ya puchi gyena ngam ari ko mong nga chu tam pu te gyin,
didn't they love gyurye ngay, kye ran ma tok,
Seiji,
did you raise your hand, or are you just scratching?
Okay, okay, come on, what's cham chu?
Wait, not you either.
Ay ya,
you got another word for Buddha, okay?
Say cham chu,
cham means clean away all your bad deeds, all your bad obstacles, all your obstacles to Buddhahood, chu means
understand everything, chu means understand everything, cham chu means Buddha, okay? Cham chu gyi sem means,
I just saved fifty dollars by the way, yeah, mind of enlightenment, so
as you know, I don't like some of the translations that you see, one is enlightened mind,
the reason I don't like it is it, to me enlightened mind means you're already enlightened,
but that's not what it means, and I don't want to say Buddha mind
or something like that, it doesn't even mean the seed for that, it doesn't mean that,
so I think it's a wrong translation, I think if the person studied
well, they wouldn't translate it that way, so it's a wish for enlightenment, okay?
Word, you can do the definition,
um, no, um is not in the definition,
nice,
definition by
Maitreya, yeah, sem kyi ma ni, what is bodhichitta? shen dun chir, for the sake of all other beings,
yang da dzokpay chang chud dun, I wish to reach total enlightenment, okay?
It doesn't mean you're enlightened already, and it doesn't mean some kind of part of you which is already Buddha, it doesn't mean that, okay?
So I don't like to call it enlightened mind, I like to call it wish for enlightenment,
and I like to put a capital W, because I think it's cool,
I didn't have time to fix the homework yet, I'm sorry,
okay,
so that's your first question, those of you who want to do the Tibetan, there's two words, chang chud kyi sem,
what is the Sanskrit?
Yeah, bodhichitta, so bodhi does mean enlightenment,
and chitta does mean the mind,
paruski gavari chitta yo, ya chitta yo, ya chitta yo, chitta, there are many words in Russian, still have this root
to read or to calculate,
and it's still chitta, that comes, Russian is much closer to Sanskrit
than other languages, must mean Russians are smarter, I think.
Okay, there's another word which is a common word for bodhichitta called sem kye, say sem kye,
this is chitta utpada,
it means to grow the mind or to grow the wish to save all beings, okay, so there are synonyms,
you can call it either one, okay?
I thought you would like to know some
other divisions of bodhichitta that are not in the reading and they're not in the homework, okay?
But if you go to the monastery and they talk about them, you'll get confused,
okay, so I thought I'll just cover them for you, they're not on your homework so you don't have to learn them or write them down.
Ready?
How about
say buram kyi shumba tabu sem kye,
buram means sugarcane,
and there's two kinds of sugarcane bodhichitta, okay?
There's two versions of sugarcane bodhichitta, and that's like a preliminary preliminary bodhichitta, okay, before you reach
the first path even, okay?
One is called
bodhichitta similar to the skin of the sugarcane, the outside part,
and then
buram kyi shing tabu sem kye means like the
buram kyi ro tabu,
like the sweet taste inside, and you see kids in India, you know, there's a
people grind up sugarcane on a little
like cart, and they have these glasses that they haven't washed for like 20 years, and
people come and take a drink, and you get diarrhea about five minutes later,
but it tastes good.
So one is called sweet like the skin of the
sugarcane, and one is called sweet like the inside of the sugarcane, okay?
And the first one is
is when you go to a class
and the teacher teaches you about bodhichitta, okay?
tu jung gi shing tabu, you just heard about it, like you're still thinking about it, okay?
So in the class
you get bodhichitta, but it's not real bodhichitta, it's just what we call sugarcane bodhichitta, two kinds, okay?
When you just heard about it
for the first few times we call it
skin, okay?
We call it hearing wisdom, right? Just in the class you heard about it, and you start to think about it, okay?
Then when you go home and you think about it
and then you meditate on it, that's called sam chung, gom chung gi sherab, so you
by thinking about it by yourself at home
or in your car, okay?
And then meditating on it you get, which one?
Bodhichitta.
Yeah, you get the taste, the real taste, you still don't have bodhichitta, but it's called
inside sugarcane bodhichitta, okay? So that's a
that's a kind of bodhichitta you might see in the scriptures, but you don't know what it is, okay?
That's a little bit different, okay?
Then there's
dun dam sem kye, say dun dam sem kye
ultimate bodhichitta, okay? And that's very confusing, that means what?
The direct perception of emptiness, okay? It has nothing to do with
love or anything like that, lower
arhats can have it, lower arias can have it, it doesn't mean
love like that, it means the direct perception of emptiness, okay?
So ultimate bodhichitta means
the direct perception of emptiness.
Yeah,
then if you get some, if you're a buddha, are you still a bodhisattva? By the way, when you get some, when you get bodhichitta,
you're a bodhisattva, real bodhisattva, bodhichitta,
then you're a bodhi-, when you have that experience, for example,
about all the
beings in the universe, then you're a real bodhisattva, okay?
Can you still be a bodhisattva and be a buddha?
Yeah, you don't give up your bodhisattva license
when you get to your buddha license, you get to keep both cards,
okay? Now you're a bodhisattva who's a buddha, okay? Like that.
And there's a debate, and I'm not sure where I stand on it,
my Trayas text, Abhisamangara
says that
to enter the first path
on the Mahayana track,
you have to have
SEMS KYI CHUN MA MA YIN PA, say CHUN MA MA YIN PA,
the real one,
so
they say when you reach the first path, the personal disaster path
on
Mahayana track,
you are a bodhisattva, okay? I'm not sure about it,
I'm not sure about it. I learned all my Tibetan from Geshe-la,
he talked to me for many years,
he's so nice, he just talked to you, whatever you say he pretends to understand it,
and we had this relationship for many years,
or he would correct me, and that's why I can talk, it wasn't Kam Rinpoche because he won't talk to me,
so, but Geshe-la always talked to me, and
so when I need to know a word I will ask him, what does CHUN MA mean?
And then I remember we were
driving somewhere and we stopped at Howard Johnson, and to have a Tibetan tea,
and
they serve him fake, what do you call it, fake cream?
They call it cream dream or something like that, it's a cream nightmare actually,
it's fake milk,
it's mostly chalk and water, and they'll give it to you in the cheaper restaurants if you ask for milk, so
he said, ah, now I'll teach you a new word about bodhichitta, I'm like, what? He said, this fake milk is CHUN MA,
this is what CHUN MA means, this is fake, and he says, if you want to know how it relates to bodhichitta,
you get me some real milk right now,
then I'm like, okay,
and I hassled the waitress and she bought some real milk, and okay, he said, this is CHUN MA
MA YIN PA, this is non-fake milk, unfake milk, this is real milk, okay, so
SEMS RGYAS CHUN MA MA YIN PA means the real thing, not like
sugar cane, not like sugar cane, okay, you get it for real, but
it's not clear to me
from the lower middle way school if you
have that experience with countless beings, I don't think so.
So bodhisattva Arya,
I don't know what you want to call it, the
slot machine experience,
okay, comes after the direct perception emptiness, okay, so now you have like six kinds of bodhichitta already, okay?
Like the skin of the sugar cane, like the inside of the sugar cane,
ultimate bodhichitta, normal bodhichitta, Arya bodhichitta, and then you have, what's one more, CHUN MA MA YIN PA,
the real thing, when you switch from sugar cane to the real one, okay? It's not on your homework,
it's just if you want to teach a deeper class, okay?
All right,
so the second question in your homework, when do you become a bodhisattva?
When you reach that
experience that you want to save all living beings, then you're a bodhisattva, so the state of mind makes you a bodhisattva, okay?
Tibetan is CHANG CHU SEMS PA, okay? What does SAD PA mean?
Warrior, okay? SAD PA means warrior.
SEMS PA,
spelled D-P-A in a possibly right word, not P-A,
means
you're a warrior, okay? So it's called a Buddha, Buddha warrior? You're not a Buddha yet,
but bodhisattva means a Buddha warrior, okay?
Question number three on your homework, has every bodhisattva seen emptiness directly?
No, okay, could be on the first two paths of the Mahayana track, and they didn't see
bodhisattva, bodhichitta, emptiness directly, okay?
Okay,
but if you do get bodhichitta, CHUN MA MA YIN PA,
the real one,
you entered
TSOGS LAM for Mahayana, you entered the first path.
In the Heart Sutra?
Yeah, GATE GATE, it's the first GATE, you entered the first path, you saw,
you have that experience, you're a bodhisattva, okay? GATE GATE.
Okay, first GATE, right? What's the second GATE?
Yeah, path of preparation,
para gate,
path of seen, para sang gate,
path of habituation, and then bodhisattva, enlightenment. Pass it normally, okay good.
So then I have a list of
benefits of
getting to bodhichitta that comes from your reading, okay? There's nine
benefits in your reading, you only have to get six of them on the homework, so it's
ridiculously easy, okay?
So here we go, okay, you can put any one that you like, but you have to do six, then I'm going to give you
22 more for fun,
okay? Because it's a short homework, okay? We'll do 22 more from
Maitreya, okay, all right.
DGE BA RNAM KHYEN GYI ... by the way, the homework here has a lot of mistakes in the Tibetan,
so we got to fix it sometime, okay? The homework master has a lot of ... this, particularly this last question.
Okay, DGE BA RNAM KHYEN GYI RGYU,
every good thing you ever do
becomes a direct cause for buddhahood, okay? It cannot go to other places, okay?
You don't get yochaos or
donuts or ... okay, I guess you might get some,
but they're all aimed at buddhahood. All the good deeds you do,
go into the bank
to create your buddhahood, okay? Once you have
bodhichitta, okay?
Because of that experience you had, okay? You can't ...
unless you're having a really bad day, like you're throwing up on DGE,
you can't have ...
you can't forget what you're trying to do, right? You can't, you can never forget, so it's ...
everything has the intention of becoming a buddhahood, okay?
So you can't do a good deed
as a bodhisattva
without it becoming a cause for enlightenment directly, okay? You have to say directly, why?
I mean, blowing your nose can be an indirect cause of enlightenment, right?
Okay, we have to say direct cause, all right.
Number two,
what's the mean word?
Yeah, to be worthy, okay?
Of the prostration
of every being on this planet, okay? If you reached ... if you have bodhichitta in your mind,
if you want to
save all beings, if that's your life's intention,
then actually every time anyone meets you they should
bow down to you, okay? Now they don't know who you are usually,
so
don't get worried if they don't bow down to you.
Also, I'd say something about bodhisattvas, they don't advertise
that they are bodhisattvas, they don't advertise that they're ayas, they don't put a tattoo here
that says bow down to me,
you know?
They keep it
a little bit quiet, that's a tradition.
Nobody wrote that down, it's just a tradition. When you
have that experience of emptiness, and when you have that experience of
seeing all beings and wanting to help them,
you don't advertise it, you don't go running to your friends and say, oh,
I just saw emptiness there. There's something about it,
and I think what it is is
when we study anger tomorrow morning, hopefully,
we'll be talking about the yul of anger, who are you angry at, okay?
And that determines what's the karma of the anger,
so if you're angry at a bodhisattva
or you're angry at an Arya, the karma is extraordinary, you know? You could die from that, you see what I mean?
So I think bodhisattvas and Aryas, they don't advertise much
because they don't want people
to know who they are, so they make heavier karma, you see what I mean?
So it's kind of an unspoken
tradition for Aryas and bodhisattvas, they don't advertise it.
Because those people are not going to believe them anyway,
and then they will do some bad thing and they will have terrible,
very, very serious results, okay? From doing small bad things to the Arya or the bodhisattva, so
I think that's why the tradition
of not talking much about it, okay?
Anyway, there's no way another person who can can confirm
that you are Arya or bodhisattva, right? They can't read your mind, if they can read your mind, they know,
but
you could tell them you're a bodhisattva, but they can't
confirm it, right? So in Buddhism, especially in the second school,
logic school, we don't ask people to
make a jump
of faith that they cannot figure out with their mind, it's against Buddhist policy,
you see? If they don't have the equipment
to confirm that you're a bodhisattva and Arya,
then it's a bad deed
to tell them you are,
and they can't check, they can't confirm, you see? So Buddhist logic is very beautiful,
and if you fight with your wife, it's good to know Buddhist logic.
You never use
a statement that the other person doesn't already accept, it's not legal
in Buddhist logic, so if you've never been to the restaurant in Bui,
and I say,
it's a good restaurant because you know you've been there, then you have to say, no, I haven't been there, see, for that person
it's not a good reason, you see?
So if you give someone a reason which is not good for them,
in Buddhist logic, it's not logic, it's just wrong, and it's your fault.
Interesting, you see? There's no truth
outside, the truth is
what does the other person already understand?
And then you can use logic, oh you forgot, we went there a year ago, it was good food, we should go again,
that's good logic, okay? They can confirm it, okay?
So with a bodhisattva and Arya, a normal person cannot confirm it, okay? So it's kind of not fair
to tell them, look, I'm a bodhisattva, you should treat me like a bodhisattva, never yell at me,
or you will go to the lowest hell, you know?
So obviously that could be abused also, okay?
Say nyerang silki nunpa, and here the homework key has an error, okay?
Silki nunpa, Rinpoche taught me a nice
example, I think I told you before,
we were watching TV, and of course, I'm not...
Geshe-la and me weren't allowed to watch the TV, we have to sneak into his room,
and he was watching a news show,
and they had the Queen of England in a row of women,
and Rinpoche said, can you guess which one is the Queen?
And it's like five old ladies, you know, but one of them has this,
and he said, that's a silki nunpa that I've been trying to teach you in the Abhisa Mankar, that,
she outshines them, she outshines them, you don't have to know which one is the Queen, you can tell,
she has some kind of a, what do you call, glamour, in old Irish
sense, she has some,
she has some
glow about her, that's called silki nunpa, so the next quality,
which is the third one, is that once you get bodhichitta,
you outshine those other Buddhist practitioners, maybe they saw emptiness,
and maybe they even reached arhat,
but they don't have this wish to help all living beings, okay? So you
outshine them, if they put you up
in the TV next to them, you will
you will look more
cool, something, okay, silki nunpa, all right?
The next homework answer has two mistakes in the Tibetan, in one line, so we got to fix that, okay,
gyewa chung se tek chen gyu che,
it means
every little thing you do
becomes Mahayana, everything you do becomes Mahayana, you drink some tea,
you know, you wash dishes, you vacuum the floor in the temple,
it becomes Mahayana, it becomes bodhisattva's activity, okay, so everything you do
becomes Mahayana, okay, you are Mahayana,
you are the Mahayana, okay, got it?
What number was that?
Yeah, good,
even bad deeds, now that's a hard question, I would say Mahayana bad deed,
more bad karma,
I got out of that one, okay,
next homework
answer is mistaken,
say,
everything you do becomes the activity of bodhisattva, okay, and it's similar to the last one, but these aren't very,
they're not clearly very different from each other, okay, everything you do
becomes the bodhisattva's way of life, okay, the last one was
everything you do becomes Mahayana, but it's the same thing really, okay,
but it's kind of cool, yeah, here he says, Stanley, he says the good deeds you do become the activity of bodhisattva,
oh, and the last one said good deeds too, okay, giwa, all right, that's number
five,
these are coming from Pabongka Rinpoche's commentary, okay, and you can read it in the reading number seven, okay,
sangye nang gi se su gong, the Tibetan is misspelled again in the homework yi,
I like this one, this is gyal se,
so venerable gyal se's name is gyal se, it means gyal we se,
and it means
son or daughter of the victors, son or daughter of the victors, okay,
when I wrote this translation 27 years ago,
they didn't say he or she,
they just said he in English, in American English,
you know, every person who wants to become a bodhisattva, he should do this, and then
in the last 27 years they made it more equal,
and they say he or she, or you can say they,
so you're going to see that sometimes in the reading, and I'm sorry for it, I just didn't have time to fix them all, okay,
okay,
it means
all the buddhas consider you their son or their daughter, okay, and that's kind of cool,
dan ni sang gyur rik su gye, sangye se su dag gyur to, dan ni dag gyu chi ni kyan rik dang tungpe le tsam te, kyi mi tungpe rik de la,
nyopar ming gyur de dag ja, this is the short
bodhisattva vow, you can take bodhisattva vows in one minute if the lama knows the verse, okay,
dan ni sang gyur rik su gye, now today I have joined the family of the buddhas,
sangye se su dag gyur to, now I became a son or daughter of the
buddhas,
dan ni dag gyu chi ni kyan, now no matter what, rik dang tungpe le tsam te, I will act
to keep my family happy,
dan ni sung gyur rik de la, this faultless lineage, I will never embarrass my parents,
okay, that's the one of the,
if you have to take bodhisattva vows in the airport
with some lama who's changing planes,
you can use that one,
okay,
remember our lama used to use it sometimes, it means I won't mess up,
I won't make my parents unhappy, I will keep these bodhisattva vows, okay,
so you become a new family, you join a new family,
you're the buddha family, and they take care of you special, I know they're supposed to be equal to everybody, but they're not,
okay, they take care of you special, okay,
you will meet them frequently, okay,
number one,
seven, chen chu senpa nang gi,
pun du gong,
yeah,
and all the other bodhisattvas in the universe will think of you as their brother or their sister, okay,
so the last one was you got new parents,
and this one you got new brothers and sisters, okay,
so all the bodhisattvas introduce you, and they say, oh this is my sister Jenny Wong,
this is my
bodhisattva sister Jenny Wong,
so gyal se is lucky she got this name, nun's name,
daughter of the buddhas, princess of the buddhas,
sometimes se can mean daughter, sometimes se mo,
sometimes it can mean princess, but we know which one she is,
she's the princess of the buddhas, okay, okay, so that last one was all the bodhisattvas consider you their brother or their sister, okay,
thek chen la shuk, say thek chen la shuk,
you enter Mahayana, okay, so becoming a bodhisattva,
getting real bodhichitta, chu ma ma yin, but not fake one,
and
entering Mahayana are the same, same moment, in the same moment, you can now you can say I'm in the Mahayana,
I'm in the greater path, okay,
why greater path? Because yana
can also mean what?
I like to call it vehicle capacity, like can your car carry 12 people or will it break?
You see, so Mahayana means big capacity, okay, big, strong enough to carry
lots of people, how many people?
Countless, okay, countless, billions and billions, okay,
what number?
Nine,
last one, right, on this list,
say tse chig la
sangye,
you have the capacity to become a buddha in one lifetime, if you practice tantra,
vajrayana, then because you're a bodhisattva you can reach buddhahood in one lifetime, okay,
ku ma,
okay,
that's the whole homework,
I don't feel too well, but I'd like to go another half hour, okay, and I'd like to read you
the 22 from Maitreya,
which are very cool, okay, so I'm making a new rule
on this homework, you're going to get 31,
and you only have to write six,
if you can't remember six you have a problem, okay, you ready?
Yen ten kan, yen ten di den chog rupay, de yang sasar,
come on, come on, de yang sasar dangwa me, you want to do it?
Just the shloka chik, he's going to give you the monastery financing.
De yang sasar dangwa me, de da rin chen chung ne tso, do je rin me shen nge dang, hi shen nu pung nge maluk,
gya po zo da lam po che, shon pa kyu me choo dang ni, drang nge choo po tri nam kyi, nam pa nge choo tang nge so.
Thank you.
These are the 22 kinds.
And I have the Sanskrit for you just for fun, okay, and I think
it's good to know a little bit of Sanskrit,
it's a good seed in your mind, they say after you become Buddha you speak Sanskrit, okay,
so let's put some seeds for the Sanskrit, okay,
here we go,
I
have two versions of this,
one is by Tsongkhapa, and I figure you'd rather have that, it's a little bit longer,
but maybe we'll finish tomorrow if we have to, okay, so the first one, de yang sa, say sa,
sa means the foundation of the earth, sashi, right, in the sushi part,
sashi,
sushi is sashi, it means the the ground, bumi, bumi in Sanskrit, okay, bu,
it can mean bu in Sanskrit, okay, and it means the the ground,
so if you get to bodhichitta
you get the foundation, I was in, where was I?
I don't remember, Zhengzhou maybe,
but for two years they're building a skyscraper next to the hotel,
and they're
working on the foundation, and it's amazing to watch, they have to dig
very very deep,
and they have to put the cement very very deep, and it took like two years
to finish the foundation, then the rest is easy, right, but if the foundation of a high building is not strong,
the high building will fall down, okay, so they spend a lot of time on the
foundation, so you can say foundation, okay, it's a foundation, for what?
You can build all the other Buddhahood things on it, okay, we call 37 chang chok so dun, 37 qualities of a Buddha,
you can build them on this great foundation, you can build
a 37 story building on this foundation, okay, so you have the correct foundation,
to go higher, okay, you can start doing
Buddha skyscrapers, okay, but if you don't have bodhichitta you cannot, okay, so these are
allow you to go higher and higher, okay, so the first
the first example of the 22 of Maitreya is boo, boo, boo,
and it means the foundation, okay, the foundation,
and you can build lots of beautiful things on top of it, okay, you can really build
a Buddha's body and mind on top of it, okay,
all right, second one,
say hema,
hema means gold in Sanskrit, hema, okay, suvarna is another word, but hema
means gold,
gold is what we call a noble metal, what's it mean?
It won't rust, it won't oxidize, if you leave it out
in the stream, or you leave it out in the rain
for a thousand years, it will still be as bright.
We were in Japan, were you with me? I don't remember. Oh, we got invited to this
private jewelry collector, last month he was in Forbes,
and you know, right, you sent it to me,
Mr. Arigawa in Tokyo, he has
he has like 2,000
ancient pieces of jewelry, you know, he has these crowns
of the kings of Europe, they have 2,000 diamonds in them,
he has a necklace of Queen Elizabeth, the diamonds are this big, he put it on a wreath,
and we took a picture and
he just likes the diamond cutter book,
and he says, we are brothers, and he, so he spent four hours with us, and he
showed us all these things, and then on me he said, come here,
and he gave me a
crown,
Roman crown, 2,000 years old, and it has laurel leaves, special leaves,
all gold,
and very very thin, they feel like, if you touch them they go like this, you know,
and
he put it on my head, and I told Scott, take a photo quick,
and then
it started to fall off, and I didn't know what to do, and I grabbed it, and one of the leaves fell off, and I'm like,
you know, I said, how many million dollars do I owe you, you know,
and he said, don't worry, I can fix it, you know, but
they didn't polish the gold
for 2,000 years, because it doesn't rust, gold doesn't rust, okay,
and Bodhisattva's state of mind,
after that first day,
it will never change, it won't get rusty or dirty or old, okay,
44 years later, it's still as strong, it doesn't get less, okay, it just gets strong, okay,
like gold, okay,
doesn't ever change, the motivation is still 100% the same,
okay,
all right,
third one,
what's the Sanskrit for moon?
Chandra, okay, Chandra means moon,
incense comes from that, the c-e-n,
or incandescent comes from that, okay,
and it means the moon, okay, the shining one,
and what it means is
let me see here,
yeah, so moonlight
is supposed to be different from sunlight
in Buddhism, and certain kinds of flowers,
like we have one here, it's called,
what is that?
Datura, yeah,
it's a white flower, it only opens in moonlight,
you can see it here, it's also called loco weed,
loco means crazy,
and if you eat it, you have a hallucination, so some
people eat it on purpose, some people die,
so don't do it, okay,
but sometimes cattle will eat it and they'll go, they will die, so it's a beautiful white flower, the flower doesn't hurt you,
I tried to take one from Diamond Mountain to my house, it wouldn't grow, I don't know why,
but anyway,
here's Tsongkapa,
tsongpa tsongpa hlakpe hlakpe tsongpa dun derpa ni,
tawa tsepa,
tawa tsepa means rising moon,
what do you call it?
Waxing,
waxing moon,
the waxing moon in
in Diamond Mountain ends tonight,
it's been growing for 14 days,
and it stops getting bigger tonight, tomorrow will be full moon,
and then it starts to shrink, okay, so this moon means
waxing moon,
gyeway chu dak ni,
tada kong ne kong du pangway gyup nyi kyi te,
then you're good,
you're good deeds, you're good qualities,
just keep getting more and more sweet,
more and more big, okay, and that's like the moon, growing moon,
okay,
and that's the third one, so if you have bodhichitta,
then I don't know, even your physical qualities, even your
mental capacity, it grows every day,
and your good deeds grow every day, you do more and more cool things,
okay,
like the moon, like the waxing moon,
fourth one is difficult,
uh,
let me get it right,
say jvalana,
jvalana, j-v-a-l-a-n-a, jvalana, it means a fire, agon?
agon?
agonya,
agonya, okay, that by the way comes from Agni,
Sanskrit, so anyway, uh,
fire, so what's the fire?
uh,
it burns
the wrong ideas about emptiness, okay, it helps you burn
the wrong ideas about emptiness, and you know, whose school is abhisamankara?
Lower middle way, so they say there's kind of
three flavors of emptiness, right?
Three flavors of emptiness, I don't think I gave those to you
in the seven,
but uh,
for example, you might say that
someone in an abhidharma track,
they will perceive emptiness as nothing is
unchanging, nothing is unchanging, don't get upset
if your husband fights with you because it won't last forever,
that's a kind of a lower emptiness, okay?
Does it help to burn your bad deeds?
Yeah, you won't yell back, right, or you'll try to stick cum, it's a lower emptiness, it's not real emptiness, but it will burn
your negative emotions, okay? Second one, we can say second school,
emptiness, huh?
Yeah, so the first one is called mi tape tongwa, by the way, I say, tape tongwa,
empty of being unchanging, second one,
okay?
Yeah, I don't have control, okay, I don't have control, rang wang ki tongwa,
okay, rang wang ki tongwa, I don't have
control over this husband, I can negotiate, I can talk reasonably,
I can
blackmail, no dinner tonight, later on I could blackmail something more serious,
but it might not work, okay? What might not work?
Lower school definition, okay? Lower school definition
might work, might not work, lower school emptiness, okay?
And then the highest emptiness
of this husband coming from my seeds, if I want him to be nice to me, the only thing I can do is
be nice to my kids, stop yelling at my kids, then I will make sweet seeds,
if I speak kindly to my kids,
then I will plant seeds and my husband will speak kindly to me, does it work sometimes or all the time?
It works all the time, sometimes it doesn't look like it's working because it takes time for a seed to open, okay?
So don't lose faith in it just because it takes time to open, okay?
Don't plant a watermelon seed and expect a watermelon the next day, doesn't happen, okay?
All right, so it burns the three kinds of
wrong ideas,
that things are unchanging,
that things are under my control,
or that things don't come from my seeds, okay? Got it? That's the fire.
If you have bodhichitta, it's easier to understand those things, okay? Much easier.
Because everything you do is Mahayana Dharma, then you're making good karma constantly, okay?
If a bodhisattva sits in the class
or a non-bodhisattva sits in the class, the bodhisattva will get much more good karma, okay?
All right,
number five is called nidhi, say nidhi.
And we'll go another half hour, okay? I'm going to stop half an hour early, don't get upset.
Nidhi means treasure, like,
I don't know how you say,
like gold mine, you can say gold mine.
So nidhi means
treasure in that sense. If you dig under the ground, you will find this big bunch of gold, okay?
And that refers to the bodhisattva's
capacity
to do the first perfection.
Yeah, they're giving, they're much more into giving, okay? They're much more enjoy giving and they
they're never stingy, they just give, give, give, give, okay?
They get something and they give it.
I have a diamond dealer friend, he's a Jane,
a very, very nice man,
and he donates money every day to something.
And I said, you know what?
Don't you ever run out of money? He said, no,
you got to keep it moving, man, you got to keep it moving.
And he's not Buddhist, but he's got this understanding, you know, keep it moving. When you hold on to money, it stops making money,
you know, and when you give it to other people, it keeps making money, okay? So bodhisattvas are like that.
They keep giving and giving and giving, like a gold mine, okay? You can keep digging and there's more gold, okay?
There's a little bit of self-interest there, who wants to explain it?
Yeah, for a bodhisattva, giving away things is not so cool in one way because
they clearly know they're going to get more.
So it's almost selfish,
you see? They keep giving students hundred dollars to answer questions.
Okay?
In the monastery, you don't answer the question, you get a rosary
on the head, yunten can tell you.
Okay, but so bodhisattva is kind of tricking everybody. Oh here, take my money. Oh, you're so nice to give me money.
Yeah, I'm so nice.
But actually, I'm making more money, okay?
All right? Nidhi, the giving of a bodhisattva is like an endless gold mine, okay?
Number six, out of
twenty-two. By the way, maybe I'll try to find it for you tomorrow,
a very cool Chinese businessman, Dr. Wu,
who paid for your Tsongkhapa cafeteria, and you should thank him if you ever meet him,
and he paid for the roads that are not quite finished yet,
and
he asked me one day to come to his apartment in Beijing and teach him this twenty-two,
and we did, I think, were you there, Xiaoping? Or you both were there, I don't remember.
Uh,
and he had a tanka
of the twenty-two,
and I think I made a copy of it. I'll show you, okay? It's cool to try to figure out where's the twenty-two
in the tanka. I think so.
Okay,
six is your second perfection gets cranked up.
Huh? Yeah, morality, ethical way of life. In America, when you say morality,
it seems a little bit too Christian, like very
tough Christians, you know, if you don't follow their
ideas about morality, you're a bad person, so I try to call it ethical life, you know, ethical life, ethics,
same meaning, same meaning, but anyway,
uh,
your, your ethical life, your morality gets very, very strong.
Bodhisattvas are more,
they follow the Hinayana
morality better than the Hinayana.
That's a big advertisement that was made by the, written by the bodhisattvas,
okay? Like,
we don't kill better than those Hinayanas don't kill,
and we don't steal better than those Hinayana don't steal, because we understand
the point of it, we really understand, and we want to become buddhas as fast as we can, so we don't hurt people, okay? Got it?
That's compared to a ratnakara, you got it word? Ratnakara.
Not exactly.
Uh,
it's one of the five dhyani buddhas, right? What color?
Yellow. It means source of jewels, right? Akhara means source,
ratna means jewels, okay?
So,
ratnakara means you are like a source of jewels, okay?
You are like a source of jewels,
uh, because you understand
that keeping your morality
is like where you get
all the precious things from that, okay? And just normal morality, okay?
Also, it means bodhisattva morality, and also tantric morality, if you have it, okay?
Number seven relates to the next
perfection?
No.
Yeah.
What's the next perfection?
Giving, ethical life,
patience, not getting angry, okay?
And it's compared to arna, say arna.
Arna means the ocean, it's an old word for the ocean, okay?
Sagara is the more common word, but arna is an ancient word, okay? Arna.
This is cool because, uh,
if the same wind blows on a leg
and it blows on an ocean,
the leg will get choppy, but the ocean will stay glassy, okay?
So bodhisattvas
are so advanced, they don't get angry easily, okay?
Even if this person wasn't coming from me,
they're the person I'm trying to save, they're the person I'm trying to help,
so I can't get angry at them.
Parents don't really get angry at their children, they pretend to be angry,
but as I said, it's difficult to find a parent who divorced their kids.
They divorce each other,
but nobody divorces their kids, very rare, okay?
So, uh,
arna, arna in Sanskrit means ocean, so bodhisattva's mind
is like an ocean, and a small wind
cannot upset the bodhisattva's mind. They never get
really angry, they get sort of angry,
okay?
But they never get totally angry, they can't,
because these are my kids, these are the ones I saw in my
vision, these are the ones I promised to keep, to take care of, okay? So they never get totally angry.
They can get a little bit angry.
Okay,
number eight, right? Let's try to do half, okay? Let's say vajra,
diamond, right? Vajra is the old word for diamond. I like it because vaj means
power,
and what English word comes from it?
Vegetable, okay? So in ancient times, in India,
vegetables were considered to have great power, more than meat or
things like that, so a person who's a vegetarian is actually stronger.
When I became, I'll tell you the story, okay? Maybe Geshe-la doesn't know it,
okay?
So one day, you know, I'm the cook for eight years,
which is why people are helping me all the time,
and I have to make momo, you know? Momo is meat,
you cut meat and you put it inside a
dough and you cook it, and then,
so I have to cook it every day, but I don't like to eat it. I want to be a vegetarian,
but everybody in the monastery is eating meat at that time, not now.
And so I,
one day I told my teacher, I don't feel so good, you know? I think I have to go to the doctor,
and I drove to the doctor in, what's that place called? Framingdale.
It's about
half an hour from the monastery,
Mongolian monastery, and
I sat in the car outside the doctor's office
for like 45 minutes, then I drove home,
and I told my lama, you know, the doctor told me it's very serious and I have to stop eating meat,
you know, and
Tibetans really respect doctors.
So my lama was like, oh, okay, you don't have to eat meat, you know? You still have to cook it,
but you don't have to eat it.
And then, you know, my family, my friends, they found out I wasn't eating meat, and they
they said, oh, you're going to get sick, you, you will, what?
You won't have enough protein, stuff like that, you will get sick,
you'll get weak, you know, and
that was
34 years ago,
and I'm still doing, I'm 66, still doing yoga with all you 30s and 40s,
okay? I think I'm the strongest one left from my generation, except today.
But
all my friends who told me don't stop eating meat, they're all dead.
They all had heart attacks,
they all had
cancer. I believe that eating meat creates those seeds.
I think the bad karma creates cholesterol,
and I think you're more likely to die.
So I can honestly say
about half of those friends are dead, who told me don't stop eating meat.
Okay?
What are we talking about? Oh, Vajra.
Okay, there's a region why it means vegetable, okay?
All right, so number eight relates to the perfection of, the next perfection.
Joyful effort, so bodhisattva
is much more capable of practicing
fun
than someone who's not a bodhisattva. Even if they're feeling sick, they can still make jokes and stuff.
Okay, so
I, you know, it's called effort, but really it means
fun effort. You have fun
doing Buddhism. It's fun for you, you know, and
if someone says you want to see a movie or you want to go visit this sick person, you say, oh man,
I want the high quality entertainment
at the hospital.
You see, so then you have fun doing things. People think you're crazy because
maybe you're studying all the time or translating, and you're like, don't you want to have some fun?
They say, no, I am having fun. You're not having fun.
Okay, so that's Vajra. What it means is
if you,
oftentimes
the word diamond
in Tibetan or in Buddhist scripture is called mi che pa,
cannot be split.
The thing which cannot be split, so it means
as long as you have bodhisattva mind,
you can't be split from working hard for other people. You will never give up
taking care of other people, okay?
And so it's called unsplittable, and that's the meaning of Vajra.
Number nine, we'll do two more. Okay, we'll do eleven.
Uh,
what do you guess is next?
Yeah, I was hoping you would give it to me Stanley.
Yeah, meditation. Okay, so
the next one is called achala.
Achala.
Ah means not in Sanskrit. Ah at the beginning of a word means, ah, it means not, okay?
And uh,
like amita pa,
amita pa,
ah means not,
mita means measure, pa means light,
amita pa, not amitabha,
okay? Amitabha, okay?
So achala means not chala,
and chala
means to move,
to move, okay? The word accelerator comes from that,
alacrity comes from that I think, car comes from that, chariot comes from that, it means moving vehicle, okay?
So what's an achala is a mountain,
never moves, you can't just move a mountain if you don't like where it is.
Difficult to move a mountain. So bodhisattva's
meditation is very very high,
much much higher, okay? If you're,
if in the back of your mind you had the, we're going to call it the slot machine experience,
it's kind of cool, right?
If you had the slot machine experience, then uh,
your meditation is completely different, okay? It's very very high, very deep, okay?
Your focus is ten times deeper, a hundred times, a thousand times.
Okay.
mi kye pa, nothing can move it, akshobhya, cannot be moved, okay?
All right, two more.
You already said that Geshe-la, yeah.
dak me nyi tokpay sher chin, mr. word, dak me nyi tokpay sher kyi para chenpa,
dak me,
yeah, no self-nature, okay?
It means nothing has any nature of its own. Fire is not hot
by nature, okay? If you have the karma, fire is hot. If you don't have the karma, fire is cold, okay?
Your husband doesn't have any nature of being mean to you, it's coming from you, okay? Got it?
There's nothing
in, nice. I like
that. Self-existent doesn't pass the waiter test. What's the waiter test, Shampin?
Yeah, in our translation team in Sedona, when we want to use a word in a translation,
somebody goes next door to the Mexican restaurant,
and they say it to them,
and they say, do you understand what this word means? And they're like, I have no idea. So if you say,
you know, no self-nature,
they're like,
I don't know, I don't know what you're talking about. The waiter will say, I don't know what you're talking about. If you say,
is there chili in the enchiladas?
They will say, oh, I know what you mean. It's chili inside the enchilada. What's a Buddhist answer?
No, it never was.
So in, I like to sell it as a better word for self-existence.
Okay, in.
Heat is not in fire, okay?
So the tenth
metaphor, right? The tenth image for bodhichitta is, say, oshadhi.
Oshadhi.
I think there's like two Sanskrit words that start with, oh, this is one of them, oshadhi. Oshadhi means,
in fact, that datura flower
that grows here.
The Native Americans used to eat it for religion, for religious purpose.
Then they will get
some visions, like ayahuasca, something like that.
So the name for that is oshadhi.
In Tibetan, it's called men chenpo.
Men means herb, okay? But here it means
like a psychotropic herb, something like that. Okay, oshadhi. It's in the yoga sutra.
One of the reasons for
unusual experiences that are false, okay?
Anyway,
shejay chepa ne rab du shiro chepa. Here it means medicine, okay? Herb,
which gives you medicine, which is medicine. So in the old days,
almost all medicines were taken from plants.
So this means medicine plant, okay?
What if you understand the two kinds of no self-nature, okay? What's the two kinds?
Yeah, people and things, people and things, okay?
Cool.
All right, last one, then we'll
give you an early evening. Yay!
This is all extra anyway.
Okay, chu chepa, say mitra.
What's mitra?
Friend, okay?
In
what name?
shen yin.
Then if it's a good friend, dharma friend,
yeah, ge wei shen yin, which short name is gishi.
In Sanskrit, it's kalyana mitra, okay? Kalyana mitra, okay?
So, there are some extra
perfections that are not in the six,
and so kapa starts throwing them in here,
and it means to help people in an unexpected way,
to help people, we call tap kepa, right?
upaya, skillful means, okay? I don't know.
I heard Ken Rinpoche, this is a story about Geshe Lotar,
when he was young, he liked to eat a lot of momos,
so,
not now.
Ken Rinpoche will
tell him to make a lot of momos, and they will eat
a lot of momos, and then,
this is a story I heard, okay? Then Ken Rinpoche gave him a Tibetan broom, Tibetan broom is about this long,
and when you use it, you have to bend over.
You understand?
He'd give him like ten extra momos, and then he'd say, sweep the floor, and he's like,
when your belly's really full, it's
difficult to bend over, okay? So that was a joke.
Ken Rinpoche used to play on Geshe Lotar,
it's called the Momo and the Broom.
Why am I talking about that? That's a tapkepa, what's tapkepa?
Yeah, skillful means, but what's it mean? Next time he won't
eat so many, he will hide them and eat them later.
Okay?
So that's, a teacher can help you
unexpectedly, sometimes by hurting you a little bit, okay? And that's called tapkepa, so
that's the mitra, okay? If the
Lama really loves you, they will show you tough love,
tough love, and I,
you know, Ken Rinpoche rarely,
he told us, he gave us both bad names.
I'm not going to tell you Geshe Lotar's bad name,
but all day long he calls us bad things, you know, and
and
we each have several bad names,
but it means he really loves us, you see, and for me, and you're going to be an ACI teacher,
the purpose of this course is to become an ACI teacher,
or Norbert's becoming a parent,
just had a baby, and
sometimes you have to be tough on the kids, you know, sometimes you have to be tough on the kids,
like if they're going to run across the street you should,
then you should hit them so they don't die, you know, so that's called tough love,
and our Lama was very good at tough love,
he always gave us tough love, and you know, I don't think he ever told me I did something right,
but it keeps me from getting pride, you know,
so number 11, Bodhisattva,
this person who loves all living beings,
they do better tough love than other people do, they are better
at being tough on the student when the student needs it,
and if you're not tough on the student they will do something bad, they will hurt themselves,
so it's called tough love, okay, so when I'm tough to you it's just tough love,
okay, all right,
uh,
those are the first 11, okay, and we'll finish the rest tomorrow,
tomorrow evening.
Class eight, uh, oh, we didn't finish the 22, did I?
Oh man, we can't do all this stuff, uh, let me go find the 22 for you.
Yeah, let's finish the 22, let's just do everything.
That's Geshe Michael's system.
We finished, uh, we're going, this is like way back in class, I don't know, seven is it?
Uh, it was the
cool things about Bodhichitta,
there were
nine
in Pabongka, I told you on the homework I would ask for six,
and then I added 22 more, if you can't get
six out of 31, then you have a problem, okay?
So, uh, these are very, very famous, very, very beautiful
descriptions of Bodhichitta, 22
characteristics of Bodhichitta, and they are comparing
Bodhichitta to different objects in the world,
like the sun,
or gold, or things like that.
So we just finished number 11,
who can tell me what it was?
Huh?
Mitra, yeah, I think, yeah, good.
I think it's a good chance to learn 22 Sanskrit words.
These are very common words,
if you want I can give you the verse in the Sanskrit,
and if you're a yoga teacher or something, these are nice to know,
and it's a nice teaching to learn.
You just learn those 22 words in Sanskrit,
and then you're kind of prepared to teach a
before our yoga class or something, you can share a few of them,
you know?
So I, it's kind of a
extra tool in your ACI teacher toolbox, okay?
So we finished a friend, Mitra,
which means, uh,
you know, a spiritual friend, Kalyana Mitra, okay?
Who uses unusual
means to teach people,
like, I don't know,
maybe they play rock and roll,
stuff like that, okay?
We had a good time in Taiwan, we played rock and roll. Stanley, you got that video yet?
Can we show it? No, maybe tonight.
There's a nice video of Stanley doing May Day.
Okay.
Okay, uh, I mean the bass player is the best thing,
but the singer's okay.
Uh, okay,
number 12 of the 22
images for bodhichitta,
say chintamani.
Who can tell me?
Yeah, wish-fulfilling jewel. So in, uh,
in the Middle East, they have Aladdin, right?
Aladdin's lamp, and he rubs it and a guy comes out and says, anything you want. There's a really good dirty joke about that
that I learned in high school.
So if the boys want to ask me
later, I won't tell the girls.
Ask me later, I can't do it on a video.
Thank you.
The, just secret boys' meeting, okay?
It's really funny, but
okay, even so many years later.
All right, mon lam kyi par chen dang denpa ni.
It means a bodhisattva, a person who has bodhichitta, they're especially good at
prayers, okay? Prayers.
So, what does it mean, prayers?
It means their vision
for the future, okay? I want to be
a wish-giving jewel. So this jewel, you find it in the,
in like in the washout here,
you find a small jewel.
Then there's a whole ritual, you have to clean it with special saffron water,
you have to put it on top of a
religious flag,
you have to do special prayers to it on a special day,
and then the jewel will give you anything you want, so these prayers
or these intentions of a
of a bodhisattva are
like a wish-giving jewel, okay? They have
ideas in mind
of how they would like to see the world to be, they have a big vision.
They want to be a wishing
jewel for people. When people meet me,
they should get whatever they want, okay? I should be the person
who gives people anything they want, okay? And that's a wonderful
feeling.
If you're a bodhisattva, if you know emptiness, for example,
if you could teach the pen correctly,
then you could protect these people after they die. They don't believe buddhism, they don't believe karma,
they don't believe future life,
but they are going to come to this day when they die. By the way, the person who was dying did die yesterday
in the hospital, and
you know, I went and taught them the pen a couple weeks ago, so
then you're like a wishing jewel, you have something to give them, right?
Even they didn't expect it, okay? Even they didn't expect it,
you can give them something precious for their life.
And that's
probably the best thing you will ever do in your life, okay? You can give people money,
or love, or attention, or
classes, but if you can
protect them in the moment of their death, if you can be a wishing jewel
in that moment, then that's a valuable thing, okay? That's probably the best thing you ever did.
Just the pen.
Okay.
Number 13 is called arka, arka, and this is an ancient word for sun, okay?
This is an ancient word for sun.
What's the usual word, word? I don't remember. Surya. Yeah, arka is the old word, okay?
And this is called the perfection of power,
which is like the sun,
and it means
a bodhisattva,
a person who has bodhichitta.
When you
really develop this wish,
and even as a sugarcane bodhichitta, okay? Tell me what's a sugarcane bodhichitta.
Yeah, you just came to the class and the teacher taught it to you. That's
sugarcane skin.
Then if you go home,
think about it in the car, think about it in the airplane pretty deeply,
before you feel it, before you feel it a hundred percent,
you can still help people a lot. The power
of that wish changes you,
and you become like the sun, so when you're in a room
with other people,
they are like the crops,
and you are like the sunlight, so one sun
shines over this earth,
and it causes
rice to grow, it causes
trees to grow,
it causes cactuses to grow,
it burns bald people's heads,
right, JB? And
it's powerful, okay? So if you have bodhichitta, and you're just in a room with somebody,
you are helping them to grow
because you are like the sun, you are arka,
you are like the sun, and
you are
inspiring them,
you are pushing them to grow. You can't spend time
in a room with a person
whose main
job in life is to help the whole universe,
and it doesn't change you, you see, if you stand near the sun,
something's going to change inside you, okay?
So if you have bodhichitta,
you have this powerful
effect on other people, so arka is the topki parchen, okay, the perfection of power,
okay, just by your presence
you inspire people, you change them, they grow by being around you, okay?
kho ma,
all right,
number
14, gita,
gita, what's gita?
Sang, like Bhagavad Gita, song of the Blessed One, okay?
So gita means song,
and this is called yeshe kyi parchen,
the
perfection of understanding, okay?
And then they say, if you really understand
emptiness,
and you talk about it to other people, it's like the song of the Gandharva, Gandharva, okay? Gandharva means, do you know?
Yeah, heavenly
musician, they live in the Buddha paradises,
and they play rock and roll there,
especially in 1970s,
late 60s,
they especially like Neil Young, and
so these are divine musicians, so if you
understand this thing about the nose and the face, if you can explain it to somebody,
that's the sweetest song
in the world, that's the sweetest song you can sing to somebody,
and people
on a deep level, when they're around the bodhisattva,
and the bodhisattva's talking about those seeds,
it's very sweet to them, it's very sweet to them, on a subconscious level, unconscious level, they respond, okay? So
it's always okay to irritate someone with talking about the pen, okay?
On a plane, or
people ask me, you know, what's your name on the plane? I say, did you hear about the pen?
So I figure if the plane blows up and I die in the next 10 minutes, and
it's good I die talking about the pen, okay? So sing this song, learn this song, it's almost as good as jump,
learn to sing this song,
and people respond to it, even when they don't want to,
even when they don't believe you,
some part of them
says, oh this makes sense, you know, this explains the whole world,
okay? So sing this sweet song, don't be shy
to sing the song, even if you sing this song lousy, it's better than other songs,
so even if you can't sing very good,
if you sing it, it's better than other songs, okay? You can practice in the shower,
I love singing in the shower, Veronica hates it, so, okay, no, she likes it.
Okay, 15, oh this is a long one,
let me see here, it has
in the
seven,
it has seven different parts, okay, saying nerpa, nerpa,
it means king, okay?
Nerpa, ner is the ancient word for man,
and it became used in capital T, the man,
so, yeah, neropa,
yeah, neropa got the name neropa from his teacher, that's a long story, if you want to know, talk to Hasu.
I can't talk about it in public,
but Nero, the
Roman
emperor, Nero, that comes from ner,
that word comes from ner, so nerpa means king,
and this refers to what we call ngunpa shepa, a bisnya, which means
your power
to know things that are hidden
is like a king,
and no one can stop you
from anything you want to know, okay?
That's the meaning of a sangha's name, right? Tokme,
nothing can stop your wisdom, okay? Your understanding cuts through all things,
your
insight into things
cannot be stopped, your mind is like the king, the king doesn't have to ask permission to go anywhere,
the king can walk into anybody's bedroom, okay? This is the old time king, okay? King in India
was not like president, okay? The king can do any terrible thing, and people have to smile and say, sure,
you know, king says, I want your breakfast, you know, you're about to eat some cornflakes, and king's like, I want that.
In ancient India, the king owns everything,
also the people, the king can say, I like your daughter, she should come to the palace tomorrow, you know, and
so no one can refuse the king,
and if you understand seeds,
they can go anywhere, you see what I mean?
Understanding of seeds can walk into the room of any beautiful or irritating object,
okay? And explain it, okay? So it's unstoppable,
okay? Your understanding of seeds
is unstoppable, any irritating person you meet,
any goal you have to reach,
this king can go there, no one can stop him, okay? Cool? All right, that's 15, I think, right?
16 is called ganja, and it's not the ganja you heard about.
Okay, I think in modern India ganja means like marijuana or something like that,
and I've been, I played a concert, sitar concert, at a temple where everybody was,
there were about 2,000 women in white clothes
in a temple out in the middle of nowhere, and they were all singing, and they were all doing ganja, and
the only men allowed in were the musicians, and it was pretty interesting, so anyway,
okay? This ganja means pang dzu, okay, pang dzu, I don't think you know this word, human dictionary,
pang dzu means like, it's similar to kosha,
similar to kosha, what's kosha?
Yeah, treasure house, like the house where you keep all the money, all the gold, all the jewels, okay?
And if you have bodhichitta,
it is like a storehouse, where you keep your gye wa di, gye wo kha, sunam ye shi,
tso tso shi, sunam and ye shi, what's that mean?
Yeah, good deeds and wisdom, which become the physical and the mental parts of a buddha, okay?
So, a bodhisattva is like a bank vault, where they keep the karma that makes buddha body,
and the karma that makes a buddha mind, so you become like a national treasury
of Russia, they have one in US, Fort Knox, I don't know, they still have it, I don't know if it
matters anymore, because nobody cares about it, but it's where they keep all the gold in the
United States, and you become Fort Knox, you become this super bank of good seeds, okay?
Which will create buddha's body and buddha's mind, so you are called the bank vault, okay?
Ganja, okay? Ganja, old meaning of ganja, okay? 17.
By the way, I'm using Tsongkhapa's
commentary, okay? And I'm not doing the whole thing, it's longer, but we don't have time.
Number 17 is called maha-marga, maha-marga, kristin... yeah, the great path, interstate highway,
highway 10, out here, okay? maha-marga, okay? Interstate highway.
Okay, that means there are 37 qualities that you will have when you are a buddha,
and if you have them, you become a highway for other people, other people can drive on you
to go to enlightenment, okay? So you become the buddha highway for the whole world,
okay? And they drive on you to reach buddhahood. These 37 qualities, someday we can do them
slowly, but it's very nice, I think it's the best way to understand what's a buddha,
not by the form or the bodies, but by the 37 qualities they have, chen chok so dun, okay?
So once you have these beautiful qualities, which bodhisattvas are already collecting them,
bodhisattvas are already reaching some of them in a lower way, then as you are
reaching these different qualities of a buddha, you become a highway, you become a way to help other
people, and people can drive on you. Sometimes if you're a bodhisattva, it feels like people are
driving on you, okay? But you're happy, drive on me, it's okay, you get to buddhahood, you know,
I'll be the road, okay? All right, that's 17. Tibetans have funny corruption words for
modern words that they don't have in their language. So, like for radio,
they tried, the government tried to say lung tin, which is wind, wind letter, wind message.
For typewriter, they tried to do, for computer, they tried dzun num chakpar, which means finger
pressing iron picture. My friend was on the committee to choose the words, they all completely
failed, you know, they call kompudra, kompudra and red drill, and why did I talk about that? Oh,
I didn't know what's the Tibetan word for asphalt, this black road covering that we put here,
I was bragging to Geshe-la how much money we spent on the asphalt, which was almost a million
dollars, and we still need 700,000. He, we didn't even ask yesterday because we didn't want you to
have a heart attack. Anyway, I said, what's the, okay, what's your new word for asphalt? He said,
alikati, you got real alikati on your road, you know, so you can be the alikati for the whole world,
okay, they can drive on you, they can use you to get enlightened, okay, that's number 17.
You become alikati, okay, 18, and it's interesting 18 because it's yana, yana,
vehicle, okay, now yana can also be,
well yeah, shumba, Je Tsongkhapa defines it as shumba, if you spell it with a G
word it becomes young, young person, like jampel shunu is the young aspect of Manjushri,
but if you spell it with a B, bajuno, it means something you ride like a horse or a donkey,
okay, that's called shumba. So again, number 18 is yana, and this is the yana in Mahayana,
Hinayana, okay, and it means people could ride you, and so how is it different from the last one?
The last one was you can become alikati, that people can ride on to get the 37 qualities of a Buddha,
18 means your only motivation your whole life is to help other people, so it refers to your
love, it refers to, specifically ning je, karuna, okay, how much love do you have? Karuna comes
from, in Russian there's a word krish, shto znachit krisha, krisha, yeah like roof or cover,
and so karuna, this, Russian is much closer to Sanskrit, so the, also the word for hood of an
automobile is krisha, and it means cover, meaning you protect people, okay, so karuna,
compassion is number 18, okay, and that's the yana, okay, you are a horse for the whole world
because you just love them and you want to take care of them, and that's your only motivation
all the time, okay, so Nancy, best friend right, for many years in New York is Michael, Michael Wigg,
who also helped the Dharma in New York for, I don't know, 40 years, and he has a, he had a car, so not
everybody in New York has a car, you don't need a car in New York, a car is a big hassle, Nancy has
to get up at four o'clock every morning and move her car according to the, you know, parking
regulations, if you don't want to pay more than your apartment for the parking the car,
then you have to move your car around, one day I ran out of gas moving the car, I couldn't find a
parking spot, and anyway, Rinpoche had a nickname for Michael's car, which is chi pay ta,
chi pay ta, it means a public horse, you know, because he would always give you a ride, or he drove
around every lama, whoever visited New York City, he was the driver, he's extremely kind, he's a
really bodhi, sakpa type, and he would always give you a ride, it didn't matter what time,
didn't matter how far you had to go, so Rinpoche gave him a nickname, public horse, chi pay ta,
this led to the famous incident where he was looking for a parking space, I was with him in
the car, and we found one, it's like finding a gold mine, and here's this big empty parking space,
you know, and he drives by, and I'm like, Michael, what, what are you doing, you know, he says,
I don't want to use up the karma, I'm like, we have to talk about karma.
Anyway, number 18 is chi pay ta, you become yana, you become public horse, okay, and it's because
your motivation is, it's like Michael, you just want to help people, and you can call him anytime,
night or day, and he will drive you somewhere, okay, still, I'll give you his phone number, okay,
Stanley's like, yay. Okay, 19.
This one's long, I'm sorry, okay, say prasravana udaka, prasravana udaka, and it means,
let me get this screen, it means, we have a spring up here,
spring means water comes naturally under the ground, comes out, it's running right now,
you should go see it, it doesn't run all the time, and it's very beautiful, and that's why they built
this fort here, because it's one of the only springs in southern Arizona where you can get free water,
and it's, so it's a big deal, somehow the mountain shape is like a bowl, and it collects
all the water underground, and then it comes out here, and there was actually many wars here
between people for the water, so it's running right now, it's a very beautiful experience in the
desert to see it, so if you like, come up to the ranch house and spend some time by the spring,
it's a very beautiful place to sit and meditate, it's very calming, okay? Anyway, you'll never have time.
And it means you, two qualities, mi je pe sung, say mi je pe sung.
If you meditate a lot and you practice a lot, there comes a time in your life where you remember
precisely every teaching you ever had, okay? The video, you can play back the video, any video
of teachings you heard, and it's kind of beautiful, you know,
unexpected memories come in your mind of something your teacher said 20, 30 years ago,
and I always think of it as a synapse firing unexpectedly, like the electricity in the mind
goes, and then you remember, you know, somebody stood and asked you,
what's mi je pe sung, and you go, and or words from Russian class in Princeton University in 1970,
sometimes when I'm in Moscow, I say, you know, like some weird word, and everybody's like, wow, and I'm
like, yeah, I didn't think of this word for 30 years, 40 years, you know, I can't remember it right now,
but sometimes it happens that words just come in your mind, and so if you have, sung means mantra, jo,
and mi je pa means never forget, so there comes a time in your meditation when you can access
all the teachings you ever had, so even if you're going to sleep through a teaching, it's good to come,
okay, because it's still recorded, and you can access the recording later on, okay, don't forget
that skill we talk about, the ability to sit in class with your eyes open and sleep is very useful.
Now, connected with that mi je pe sung is tok me che pa, che pe popa, which means the courage
to explain the Dharma to other people without stopping, so our spring dries up
half the year or most of the year, but if you have this power, this prasravana udaka,
udaka means spring, right, prasravana, it will keep coming out, okay, and the emphasis in the metaphor
is that when you meet a bodhisattva, there's water that came out, but in English we have an idiom,
it means that there's a lot more where that came from, there's a lot more where that came from,
so the emphasis on this metaphor of you are like a spring for other people, the emphasis is
there's a lot of teachings you're giving now to them, people can see your current teaching,
but there's a lot more where that came from because of your mi je pe sung, because of your mantra,
sorry, your sung can also mean like magic, you have this synapse magic, okay, so there's a lot
more in the subconscious of a bodhisattva that they can share with you because they reach that
level in meditation where the water will keep flowing, so this little tiny spring you see here
at Diamond Mountain, which cost the lives of many people, this building we put the roof on,
what do you call it nowadays? Ranch house, if you go there there's windows like this,
there's a window shaped like this, that was for shooting people, that house was built during the
wars here, and so the spring you can see is a little water, but it's coming from an ocean
underground, okay, the whole mountain range here has a huge ocean of water underground, and so when
you meet a bodhisattva, what they're teaching is like the spring, but it also refers to the underground
water, there's an ocean behind it, okay, because they remember everything they were taught before, okay.
All right, what number are we on? I'm just checking to make sure you're awake, yeah, 20 am I right?
Let me see, let me see,
anandokti, anandokti, so it's ananda and ukti, okay, ananda, ukti, ukti means expression,
ananda means happy, okay, super happy, ah, ah, prefix in Sanskrit means super, long a, ah, okay, you have to say ah,
and ananda means happy, so ananda means super happy, ananda means unhappy, so don't call the
Buddha's disciple ananda, he's ananda, okay, Mr. Super Happy, it really, it's one of my, what, Masha?
It's one of my pet peeves in yoga class when they say something like ahinsa, which means super violent,
okay, let's see here,
this again refers to a sweet song, kung gawe dra, kung gawe dra, okay, it means the sound that
everyone likes to hear, this talking about saving the world, talking about getting out of pain,
talking about, look, being honest with people, you know, you're going to die, it's kind of weird to
meet somebody, you know, you get invited to a class and you walk in and you say, hey, you're going to die,
then they're like, whoa, but part of them is happy, ananda, part of them is happy, because
someone's telling the truth, okay, someone's telling the truth, and people aren't stupid,
you know, after your grandmother dies and, you know, your first aunt dies on you, and your pet dog
dies, and then you get the picture, you're usually about six years old or something,
people aren't stupid, so if you walk in and you start talking about death honestly, directly,
then it actually sounds like a kung gawe dra nyen, you can call it by the way the
guitar, dra nyen can mean lute or a guitar, okay, like that, violin, okay, a musical instrument,
okay, you can think of number 20 as like a musical instrument, okay, and
we have a joke, okay, I'm just going to tell you so you can remember,
say kung ga dundrup, so kung ga means annanda, dundrup means siddhartha, okay, siddhartha,
so kung ga means everybody loves him or her, and siddhartha means achieves all goals,
can achieve every goal, so sometimes in the monastery a rich person comes to visit,
and the monks have secret language to ask, do they have much money for the monastery,
okay, I'm sorry, it happens, and they'll say, is this person annanda siddhartha?
And the people go, yeah, they say, okay, let's take good care of him, okay, so annanda means
everyone likes it, siddhartha means achieves all goals, that's siddhartha's name, what does it mean?
Money, okay, so if we start talking about annanda siddhartha you know what we're talking about, okay,
of course the way you ask a person for sponsorship, and it should be straightforward and honest,
but you can still make jokes about it, it's okay, okay, that's our lineage, right? Fun lineage,
okay, all right, two more to go, twenty-one. The Sanskrit is, sorry, where did I put that?
Hang on, I got to look it up for you,
oh, nadi, let's say nadi, okay, nadi means jing, like, what do you call,
jongmai, right, nadi, it means a river, okay, river, okay, it means a river, nadi, but it can also
mean a channel where the prana flows, okay, nadi, okay, and there's lots of rivers in the world that
have the root nadi, I think Danipa is one, so, this is interesting,
because it means all rivers go to the same ocean, it means all rivers go to the same ocean,
and there's a very beautiful teaching, which we should do sometime, when we don't have anything
else to do, which say, ta thuk, tekpa chik, ta thuk, tekpa chik, in the end it's all one path, in the
end it's all one path, and that's a big debate in Prajnaparamita, okay, topic number four, huge, huge
debate, you know, and there are tantric vows, high tantric vows, against criticizing other religions,
okay, if you become a high Buddhist teacher, ACI teacher, we are still not allowed to criticize
other religions in the world, because they all flow to the same ocean, okay, if you follow that
water, nadi, you will reach the same place, okay, sooner or later you will reach the same place,
so, you know, love other religions, appreciate them, study them, I studied Koran for two months
in Morocco, it was very beautiful, and you know, learn about them a little bit, and appreciate
them and love them, in the end they flow to the same place, so never criticize, it kind of shows
you don't know anything if you criticize other religions, okay, okay, it's all nadi, it's all one
stream, and the bodhisattva understands that, okay, and they will use other religions,
my best-selling book in the world is a book about the yoga sutra, okay, which I don't believe in,
I mean, unless it gets reinterpreted, but you use other religions, learn other religions,
master them, be interested in them, respect them, okay, and you'll be glad that you did, okay,
okay, 22, and then we'll take a break, and we have to prepare for Geshe-la,
number 22, Megha, Megha, which means cloud, a cloud in the sky, okay, this is the Sanskrit,
and this is cool, when you become a bodhisattva, so in Buddhism, in ancient India,
they believe that the gods drop the rain from the sky, you know, so if it doesn't rain in your state,
you have to, you know, do a ceremony and ask the
gods in the sky, please drop some more rain, you know, so those gods became known as,
like Megha, so there will come a time as a bodhisattva when you are sitting in your Buddha paradise,
and please drop some rain on us, okay, whoever gets there first in this room, okay, let's make a
deal right now, okay, I'm not a Buddha, I'm really not, I would like to be, but let's make an
agreement, okay, everybody, whoever gets there first, you drop some rain on them, drop some dharma on
the rest of us, everybody agree? Yeah, mazal, okay, deal, so whoever gets there first, drop some
rain on the rest, drop some dharma, okay, let me and John know so we can put our hat on,
it's really irritating, so we have a deal, whoever gets there first, you know, drop some rain on us
from your Buddha paradise, cool, and that's why the bodhisattva is called the cloud, okay, cool,
okay, all right, we finished two classes ago, and we'll work hard tonight to finish everything,
and Tim will be happy, okay, who's got the sushi, Alina?
Vegetarian.